About AMIDST
============

What is AMIDST?
---------------

AMIDST is an open source Java toolbox for scalable probabilistic machine
learning with a special focus on (massive) streaming data. The toolbox
allows specifying probabilistic graphical models with latent variables
and temporal dependencies.

For start using AMIDST, just visit the
`Getting-started <getting-started.html>`__ section.

The main features of the toolbox are listed below:

-  **Probabilistic Graphical Models**: Specify your model using
   probabilistic graphical models with latent variables and temporal
   dependencies. AMIDST contains a large list of predefined latent
   variable models:

-  **Scalable inference**: Perform inference on your probabilistic
   models with powerful approximate and scalable algorithms.

-  **Data Streams**: Update your models when new data is available. This
   makes our toolbox appropriate for learning from (massive) data
   streams.

-  **Large-scale Data**: Use your defined models to process massive data
   sets in a distributed computer cluster using Apache Flink or (soon)
   Apache Spark.

-  **Extensible**: Code your models or algorithms within AMiDST and
   expand the toolbox functionalities. Flexible toolbox for researchers
   performing their experimentation in machine learning.

-  **Interoperability**: Leverage existing functionalities and
   algorithms by interfacing to other software tools such as Hugin, MOA,
   Weka, R, etc.

Scalability
-----------

Multi-Core Scalablity using Java 8 Streams
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Scalability is a main concern for the AMIDST toolbox. Java 8 streams are
used to provide parallel implementations of our learning algorithms. If
more computation capacity is needed to process data, AMIDST users can
also use more CPU cores. As an example, the following figure shows how
the data processing capacity of our toolbox increases given the number
of CPU cores when learning an a probabilistic model (including a class
variable C, two latent variables (LM, LG), multinomial (M1,...,M50) and
Gaussian (G1,...,G50) observable variables) using the AMIDST’s learning
engine. As can be seen, using our variational learning engine, AMIDST
toolbox is able to process data in the order of gigabytes (GB) per hour
depending on the number of available CPU cores with large and complex
PGMs with latent variables. Note that, these experiments were carried
out on a Ubuntu Linux server with a x86_64 architecture and 32 cores.
The size of the processed data set was measured according to the Weka’s
ARFF format.

.. raw:: latex

   \centering

.. figure:: ../img/multicore_res.png
   :alt: fig:multicoreres
   :width: 15cm

   fig:multicoreres

Distributed Scalablity using Apache Flink
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If your data is really big and can not be stored in a single laptop, you
can also learn your probabilistic model on it by using the AMIDST
distributed learning engine based on a novel and state-of-the-art
distributed message passing scheme implemented on top of Apache Flink.
we were able to perform inference in a billion node (i.e. :math:`10^9`)
probabilistic model in an Amazon’s cluster with 2, 4, 8 and 16 nodes,
each node containing 8 processing units. The following figure shows the
scalability of our approach under these settings.

.. raw:: latex

   \centering

.. figure:: ../img/cluster_res.png
   :alt: fig:clusterres
   :width: 15cm

   fig:clusterres

Related Software
----------------

Numerous tools for graphical models have been published during the last
three decades. See this
`link <http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Software/bnsoft.html>`__ for an
updated list. In the following table, the main features of the AMIDST
toolbox are compared against other related tools.

.. raw:: latex

   \centering

.. figure:: ../img/related_tools.png
   :alt: fig:relatedtools
   :width: 15cm

   fig:relatedtools

The vast majority of the similar tools do not support scalable inference
and learning algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
PGM based software tool which is able to learn general Bayesian networks
from streaming data: the rest of existing software for learning PGMs
tools focus on stationary data sets. Moreover, AMIDST is able to exploit
modern computing distributed processing tools like Apache Flink and
Apache Spark. In the era of Big Data, this is a relevant and worthy
feature. Even though MOA and ML Lib can process data streams in a
distributed way, these tools do not allow learning PGMs.

On the other hand, most of these toolboxes only deal with
discrete-multinomial variables, and only few of them also support
Gaussian and conditional lineal Gaussian random variables such as Hugin.
However, AMIDST Toolbox can deal with general conjugate exponential
Bayesian networks. In the current version, we support multinomial,
Gaussian, Dirichlet, and Gamma distributed random variables, and the
implemented Bayesian learning algorithms are general enough to
accommodate any other distribution belonging to the conjugate
exponential family. Infer.net can deal with distributions in this
family, however this tool is a proprietary non-portable software which
cannot be run in a cluster.
