.. _requirements-amidst-toolbox:

Wekalink: using an AMIDST classifier in Weka
============================================

One of the greatests points of AMIDST is the integration with other
tools for data analysis. This is the case of Weka whose integration
fuctionality is provided by the module *wekalink*. We will be able to
create a wrapper for evaluating an AMDIST classifier with Weka.

Prepare your project
--------------------

The first thing we have to do is to load the required AMIDST
dependencies in a Maven project. In this case, we will have to load the
modules **wekalink** and **latent-variable-models**. For that, add the
following code to the file pom.xml of your project.

::

       <dependencies>
       
         <dependency>
           <groupId>eu.amidst</groupId>
           <artifactId>wekalink</artifactId>
           <version>(*\amidstversion*)</version>
           <scope>compile</scope>
        </dependency>
        
         <dependency>
           <groupId>eu.amidst</groupId>
           <artifactId>latent-variable-models</artifactId>
           <version>(*\amidstversion*)</version>
           <scope>compile</scope>
         </dependency>
       
       <!-- ... -->
       </dependencies>

Further details for creating a project using AMIDST fuctionality is
given in the `Getting Started <../GettingStarted/>`__ section.

Create the wrapper class
------------------------

A custom classifier that could be handled by weka should inherit from
class *weka.classifiers.AbstractClassifier* and implement interface
*weka.core.Randomizable*. Thus we should override at least the following
methods:

-  *void buildClassifier(Instances data)*: builds the classifier from
   scratch with the given dataset.

-  *double[] distributionForInstance(Instance instance)*: returns a
   vector containing the probability for each label or state of the
   class.

Here below we show a minimal example where the Naive Bayes classifier
provided by AMIDST is used.

::


   import eu.amidst.core.datastream.Attributes;
   import eu.amidst.core.datastream.DataInstance;
   import eu.amidst.core.datastream.DataOnMemoryListContainer;
   import eu.amidst.core.datastream.filereaders.DataInstanceFromDataRow;
   import eu.amidst.latentvariablemodels.staticmodels.classifiers.NaiveBayesClassifier;
   import eu.amidst.wekalink.converterFromWekaToAmidst.Converter;
   import eu.amidst.wekalink.converterFromWekaToAmidst.DataRowWeka;
   import weka.classifiers.AbstractClassifier;
   import weka.core.Instance;
   import weka.core.Instances;


   public class AmidstNaiveBayes extends AbstractClassifier  {
       
       private NaiveBayesClassifier model = null;
       private Attributes attributes;
       
       @Override
       public void buildClassifier(Instances data) throws Exception {
           
           attributes = Converter.convertAttributes(data.enumerateAttributes(), 
                                   data.classAttribute());
           DataOnMemoryListContainer<DataInstance> dataAmidst = 
                       new DataOnMemoryListContainer(attributes);
                       
           data.stream()
               .forEach(instance -> dataAmidst.add(
                   new DataInstanceFromDataRow(
                       new DataRowWeka(instance, attributes)))
           );
           
           model = new NaiveBayesClassifier(attributes);
           model.updateModel(dataAmidst);
       }
       
       
       @Override
       public double[] distributionForInstance(Instance instance) throws Exception {
           DataInstance amidstInstance = 
               new DataInstanceFromDataRow(new DataRowWeka(instance, 
                                   this.attributes));
           return model.predict(amidstInstance).getParameters();
           
       }

   }

Note that previous code does not implement neither the learning nor the
classification processes, it simply calls to the corresponding methods
*eu.amidst.latentvariablemodels.NaiveBayesClassifier* performing such
tasks.

Testing the AMIDST classifier in Weka
-------------------------------------

Now we can evaluate an AMIDST classifier using only calls to functions
from Weka. Here we show an example where we load a dataset in format
.arff, we learn a naive Bayes classifier and we show the confusion
matrix:

::

           //Load the dataset
           BufferedReader reader = 
               new BufferedReader(new FileReader("exampleDS_d5_c0.arff"));
           Instances data = new Instances(reader);
           data.setClassIndex(6);
           
           //Learn and evaluate the classifier
           Evaluation eval = new Evaluation(data);
           Debug.Random rand = new Debug.Random(1); 
           int folds = 10;
           Classifier cls = new AmidstNaiveBayes();
           eval.crossValidateModel(cls, data, folds, rand);
           
           //Print the confusion matrix
           System.out.println(eval.toMatrixString());
